Paris, Ontario (2016 population, 12,401) is a community located at the spot where the Nith River empties into the Grand River in Ontario, Canada.
The town was established in 1850.
In 1999, its town government was amalgamated into that of the County of Brant, thus ending 149 years as a separate incorporated municipality but Paris remained the largest population centre in the county.
While Brantford, Ontario is located within Brant geographically, it is a fully independent community with its own municipal government.
Paris was named for the nearby deposits of gypsum, used to make plaster of Paris.
This material was discovered in 1793 while the area was being surveyed for the British Home Department.
By late 1794 a road had been built from what is now Dundas, Ontario to the east bank of the Grand River in what became Paris, called The Governor's Road (now Dundas St. in Paris).
The town has been referred to as "the cobblestone capital of Canada" (in reference to a number of aged cobblestone houses.
The town was first settled on May 7, 1829, when its founder, Hiram Capron, originally from Vermont, bought the land at the Forks of the Grand in 1829 for $10,000 and divided some land into town lots.
Capron built a grist mill on the present townsite and was also involved in opening an iron foundry and in mining of gypsum.
Records from 1846 indicate that the settlement, in a hilly area called Oak Plains, was divided into the upper town and the lower town.
In addition to successful farmers in the area, the community of 1000 people (Americans, Scottish, English, and Irish) was thriving.
Manufacturing had already begun, with industries powered by the river.
A great deal of plaster was being exported and there were three mills, a tannery, a woolen factory, a foundry, and numerous tradesmen.
Five churches had been built; the post office was receiving mail three times a week.
The village was incorporated in 1850 with Hiram "Boss" Capron as the first Reeve.
It was incorporated as a town in 1856 with H. Finlayson as the first mayor.
By 1869, the population was about 3200.
While the telephone was invented at Brantford, Ontario in 1874, Alexander Graham Bell reminded people in the area about a Paris connection.
"Brantford is right in claiming the invention of the telephone" and "the first transmission to a distance was made between Brantford and Paris" (on 3 August 1876).
The use of cobblestones to construct buildings had been introduced to the area by Levi Boughton when he erected St. James Church in 1839; this was the first cobblestone structure in Paris.
Two churches and ten homes, all in current use, are made of numerous such stones taken from the rivers.Other architectural styles that are visible in the downtown area include Edwardian, Gothic and Post Modern.
Paris is also the transmitter site for a number of broadcast radio and TV stations serving the Brantford and Kitchener-Waterloo areas.
The actual tower site is 475 Ayr Road, just south of the town of Ayr, and it was erected and owned by Global Television Network in 1973 for CIII-TV.
It was officially the main transmitter for the southern Ontario Global network until 2009, when its Toronto rebroadcaster (which had been the de facto main transmitter, given that the station was and still is based in Toronto) was redesignated as the main transmitter.
Global leases space on the Ayr tower for broadcast clients including Conestoga College's campus radio station CJIQ-FM as well as local rebroadcasters of the CBC's Toronto-based outlets.
The town hosts an annual Fall Fair which takes place over the Labour Day weekend.
The Fair features over 100,000 rural lifestyle exhibits, a midway complete with carnival games, rides and great food.
Canada's #1 demolition derby attracts drivers from across Ontario.
The Fair is also host to country music nights and have included big name acts such as Montgomery Gentry, Gord Bamford, Emerson Drive, Chad Brownlee, Deric Ruttan and Kira Isabella.
Paris is also the northernmost community to participate in Southern Ontario's Green Energy Hub.
Since the late 1990s, Paris has experienced population growth, which may be in part attributed to the rising popularity of rural communities among GTA bound commuters (see bedroom community) and the completion of Highway 403 between Hamilton and Woodstock.
The County is divided into five wards, each with two elected Councilors.
The Mayor for the 2014-2018 term is Ron Eddy.
The County provides fire and ambulance services but contracts with the Ontario Provincial Police to provide police services, overseen by the Police Services Board.
The administrative offices are located in Burford, Ontario.
Barker's Bush is a historic network of community walking/biking trails, rare Carolinian forest, thriving ecosystem and natural corridors.
Its main access is through Lion's Park.
Paris Fairgrounds is Brant County's Foremost Year Round Event Facility and home to the 5 day Labour Day Weekend Fair.
Paris Speedway Track There´s local Motorcycle Speedway Track in Paris, where some national Venues are held.
Quite famous Riders there were John Kehoe and Kyle Legault.
Public schools in Paris are administered by the Grand Erie District School Board, while Catholic schools fall under the administration of the Brant-Haldimand-Norfolk Catholic District School Board.
The town also has a Montessori Children's Academy.
Paris Central Public School is an elementary school that is located near the centre of downtown, with over 300 students.
Children are close to major town attractions.
North Ward School, another public elementary school, is located on Silver Street in the north end of the town.
Other elementary schools include Holy Family Elementary School (Catholic) and Cobblestone Elementary School (public).
Paris District High School (PDHS), founded 1923, is a regional public high school in the town, with over 1005 students.
The school serves as a regional secondary school for Paris and various other communities of Brant County, including Burford, St. George, and Glen Morris.
Away from Her (2006)
"Silent Hill" (location) (2006)
The Prize Winner of Defiance, Ohio (2005)
Phil the Alien (exteriors) (2005)
Shadow Builder (1998)
Spenser: Pale Kings and Princes (1994) (Television)
Ordinary Magic (1993)
Blood & Guts (1978)
The Hard Part Begins (1973)
Bark Ranger
Notable natives and residents
(ordered by last names)
Syl Apps, Olympian in pole vaulting, Toronto Maple Leafs hockey player, and Member of Provincial Parliament
Morgan Ashbury / Cara Covington, author of A Little R & R, and 38 other novels.
John Bemrose, author of The Island Walkers
Todd Brooker, alpine skier
George Bernard Flahiff, Archbishop of Winnipeg from 1961 to 1982 and cardinal of the Roman Catholic Church
Joel Cassady, Drums/Percussion in the band Walk off the Earth
Zac Dalpe, Iowa Wild hockey player
Walter Gretzky, father of Wayne Gretzky, attended high school in Paris from the family farm in nearby Canning, Ontario.
Mickey Ion, ice hockey referee in the PCHA, WCHL and NHL.
Member of the Hockey Hall of Fame.
John Muckler, NHL Coach and General Manager
John Penman, early manufacturer and businessman
Ted Reader, celebrity chef
Linda Schuyler, television producer of Degrassi franchise
Barry Silverthorn, documentary producer of The End of Suburbia
Glen Sonmor, hockey player and manager
Albert Johnson Walker, infamous conman and convicted killer
William "Lady" Taylor, early professional ice hockey player in the IPHL and OPHL.
Jay Wells, ice hockey player with the New York Rangers and Stanley Cup champion in 1994.
The Lions Club of Paris
The Kiwanis Club of Paris-Brant
The Optimist Club of Paris
Kinsmen Club of Brantford (Serving Brantford and Brant County)
Buildings and structures
CIII Television Tower
Paris Old Town Hall
The Historic Arlington Hotel
The Canadian Tavern
Hamilton Place (Key example of Cobblestone building in Canada)
Paris Branch of the County of Brant Public Library (a Carnegie Library)
The Cedar House 12 Broadway St. W (formerly the old mill that ran the raceway from the Nith River to the Grand River)
See also
At The Forks of The Grand - history book about the town
References
External links
The County of Brant
Brant Tourism
Paris Business Directory
Kinsmen Club of Brantford
Collection of historical photographs of Paris
Second collection at the same website
Historic photos of Paris Central Public School.
