Kingston is a village and a census-designated place in the town of South Kingstown, Rhode Island, United States, and the site of the main campus of the University of Rhode Island.
Much of the village center is listed on the National Register of Historic Places as Kingston Village Historic District.
The village was originally called Little Rest, but was renamed Kingston in 1826.
It was the county seat for Washington County (formerly Kings County) from 1752 until 1894, when a new courthouse was built in nearby West Kingston.
West Kingston is also the site of the historic Kingston Railroad Station which opened in June, 1875.
The station is served by Amtrak on its Northeast Corridor.
South Kingstown established the Kingston Historic District in 1959, and much of Kingston village became a National Register historic district in 1974 as Kingston Village Historic District.
The historic district is located just outside the campus of the University of Rhode Island and contains many fine examples of 18th and 19th century architecture.
The historic district includes 38 buildings.
The University of Rhode Island was established at Kingston in 1888 as the Rhode Island Agricultural School and Agricultural Experiment Station, by funding from the Hatch Act of 1887.
In 1892 the Agricultural School became the Rhode Island College of Agriculture and Mechanic Arts with funding from the Second Morrill Land Grant Act of 1890, later becoming Rhode Island State College in 1909 and the University of Rhode Island in 1951.
Wakefield, Rhode Island (3 miles)
Peace Dale, Rhode Island (3 miles)
Narragansett, Rhode Island (5 miles)
Climate
Economy
In addition to the university, major businesses in Kingston include APC by Schneider Electric and the Arnold Lumber Company.
Public schools are operated by the South Kingstown School District.
Educational institutions in Kingston include:
The Compass School, a public K-8 charter school
Kingston Hill Academy, a public K-5 charter school
University of Rhode Island
Gordon Research Conferences center
Churches and houses of worship
Religious denominations represented with churches in Kingston or on the university campus are Roman Catholicism, the United Church of Christ, Episcopalians, United Methodists, Baptists, and Judaism.
George Fayerweather Blacksmith Shop
Great Swamp Fight
Kingston (Amtrak station)
South County History Center
Tavern Hall Preservation Society/Elisha Reynolds House (1738)
Tootell House
Washington County Courthouse
National Register of Historic Places listings in Washington County, Rhode Island
References
Further reading
Images of America: Kingston by Betty J. Cotter.
Charleston, SC: Arcadia Publishing, c. 1999 ISBN 978-0-7385-6364-0
Lost South Kingstown : with a history of ten of its early villages by Kathleen Bossy and Mary Keane.
Kingston, R.I. : Pettaquamscutt Historical Society, c. 2004
A History of Kingston, R.I. 1700 – 1900: Heart of Rural South County by Christian M. McBurney.
Kingston, R.I. : The Pettaquamscutt Historical Society, c. 2004
External links
Kingston, Rhode Island travel guide from Wikivoyage
Town of South Kingstown, Rhode Island
Kingston, Rhode Island at DMOZ
</noinclude>
