Burlington is a city in Alamance County in the U.S. state of North Carolina.
It is the principal city of the Burlington, North Carolina Metropolitan Statistical Area which encompasses all of Alamance County, in which most of the city is located, and is a part of the Greensboro-Winston-Salem-High Point CSA.
The population was 50,042 at the 2010 census, which makes Burlington the 17th largest city in North Carolina.
The Metropolitan Statistical Area population was over 150,000 in 2010.
Alamance County was created when Orange County was partitioned in 1849.
Early settlers included several groups of Quakers, many of which remain active in the Snow Camp area, German farmers, and Scots-Irish immigrants.
The need of the North Carolina Railroad in the 1850s to locate land where they could build, repair and do maintenance on its track was the genesis of Burlington, North Carolina.
The company selected a piece of land slightly west of present-day Graham.
On January 29, 1856, the last spikes were driven into the final tie of the North Carolina Railroad project, uniting the cities of Goldsboro and Charlotte by rail.
The next day, the first locomotive passed along the new route.
When the iron horse arrived in Alamance County, locals referred to it as "the eighth wonder of the world".
Not long after this historic opening, the railroad realized a pressing need for repair shops.
With Alamance County's position along the new line, it became the logical choice for the shops' location.
After several debates concerning where the shops would be located, Gen. Benjamin Trollinger, a progressive Alamance County manufacturer, made an offer that settled the matter.
Gen. Trollinger owned land just northwest of Graham, and he convinced several other prominent citizens owning adjacent lots to join him and sell their property to the railroad.
By 1859, construction of the shops began.
Seemingly overnight, a town was born.
A church, bank, hotel and restaurant sprang up.
"Company Shops", as the town became known, was also chosen as the railroad's headquarters.
By the time the shops were completed, the village had grown to twenty-seven buildings.
Thirty-nine white men, twenty Negro slaves and two free Negroes were employed in or around the shops.
Sale of town lots soon started, but not surprisingly, the sale of lots was slow until after the Civil War.
By 1864, Company Shops numbered about 300 persons.
After twenty-five years of operations, the shops closed along with most of the area's railroad facilities.
In 1886, the North Carolina Railroad Company transferred its operations to Spencer, North Carolina.
The railroad offices and shops at Company Shops were closed.
With the railroad shops no longer operated there, the citizens of Company Shops decided a new name was needed.
Company Shops was reborn as Burlington on February 14, 1893.
The city of Burlington was incorporated, and a charter was issued by the State Legislature.
Around the turn of the century, the industrial era began, and Alamance County made a rich contribution to the industrial advancement of the country.
Gen. Trollinger and E.M. Holt established small textile operations along the Haw River and Great Alamance Creek.
In 1908, E.M. Holt built the first cotton mill in the South.
From the establishment of this single factory, Alamance County grew to eventually operate 30 cotton mills and 10 to 15 yarn manufacturing plants employing 15,000 people.
Eventually, the early textile venture of E.M. Holt became known all over the world as Burlington Industries, and is now headquartered in nearby Greensboro.
Throughout this period, Burlington became a prosperous and vibrant little city filled with schools, churches, newspapers, telegraph and telephone lines, roads and a streetcar line—all in keeping with the latest "modern progress" of the times.
Though textiles continued to dominate the local economy well into the 1970s, the people of Burlington knew they could not survive with only one industry.
The country's involvement in World War II brought important local economic changes.
In 1942, the federal government purchased and leased a 22-acre (8.9 ha) site to Fairchild Aircraft Corporation for the construction of test aircraft.
After two years of production, the site was leased to Firestone Tire Company for the Army's tank rebuilding program.
At the close of the war, the federal government chose not to leave, but continued to utilize the property for government contract business.
This decision would bring Western Electric to town along with new employees from around the country.
Their contracts ensured Burlington's participation during the Cold War manufacturing and testing of emerging defense technologies.
Four decades later (1991), however, the doors to Western Electric (then Lucent Technologies) were locked, and another chapter of Burlington’s history was over.
During this century-and-a-half of economic change, Burlington grew, adapted and prospered.
Originally the center of commerce for Company Shops, the downtown area still serves as the heart of today's community with financial services, government services, an expanded library, small shops, eateries and a restored theater.
Downtown has also returned to its status as a major employment center, becoming the home to Laboratory Corporation of America, one of the world's largest biomedical testing firms and Burlington/Alamance County's largest employer.
The Alamance Hotel, Allen House, Atlantic Bank and Trust Company Building, Beverly Hills Historic District, Downtown Burlington Historic District, East Davis Street Historic District, Efird Building, First Baptist Church, First Christian Church of Burlington, Polly Fogleman House, Holt-Frost House, Horner Houses, Lakeside Mills Historic District, McCray School, Menagerie Carousel, Moore-Holt-White House, South Broad-East Fifth Streets Historic District, Southern Railway Passenger Station, St. Athanasius Episcopal Church and Parish House and the Church of the Holy Comforter, Stagg House, Sunny Side, US Post Office, West Davis Street-Fountain Place Historic District, and Windsor Cotton Mills Office are listed on the National Register of Historic Places.
Burlington is located at 36°5′23″N 79°26′44″W (36.089636, -79.445578).
Located in the Piedmont region of North Carolina, Burlington is characterized as having mostly flat land with a few rolling hills.
According to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of 25.4 square miles (65.7 km2), of which 25.2 square miles (65.2 km2) is land and 0.19 square miles (0.5 km2), or 0.82%, is water.
Climate
The climate in this area is characterized by relatively high temperatures and evenly distributed precipitation throughout the year.
According to the Köppen Climate Classification system, Burlington has a Humid subtropical climate, abbreviated "Cfa" on climate maps.
There are a variety of parks that can be found in Burlington, including Joe Davidson Park, Cedarock Park, and the Burlington City Park.
Upon visiting these parks one can find a variety of things for various activities, such as baseball fields, basketball courts, soccer fields, playgrounds, disc golf and tennis courts.
The Alamance County Recreation and Parks Commission is composed of seven citizen volunteers and one representative from both the Alamance-Burlington Board of Education and the Alamance County Board of Commissioners.
ACRPD Mission Statement: The Alamance County Recreation and Parks Department will provide parks, trails and programs that inspire visitors and welcome all participants.
The Alamance County Recreation and Parks Department manages parks and community centers at the following locations:
Cedarock Park
Shallow Ford Natural Area
Great Bend Park at Glencoe
Pleasant Grove Recreation Center
Eli Whitney Recreation Center
Alamance County offers many hiking and paddle opportunities including the Haw River Trail and the NC Mountains-to-Sea Trail.
The Alamance County Recreation and Parks Department manages accesses to the Haw River Paddle and Hiking Trail at the following locations:
Altamahaw Paddle Access
Shallow Ford Natural Area
Great Bend Park at Glencoe
Glencoe Paddle Access
Saxapahaw Lake Paddle Access
Saxapahaw Mill Race Paddle Access
Demographics
As of the census of 2010, there were 49,963 people, 20,632 households, and 12,679 families residing in the city.
The population density was 1,967.0 people per square mile (760.5/km²).
There were 23,414 housing units at an average density of 921.8 per square mile (356.4/km²).
The racial makeup of the city was 57.6% White, 28% African American, 0.7% Native American, 2.1% Asian, 0.1% Pacific Islander, 9.2% from other races, and 2.4% from two or more races.
Hispanic or Latino of any race were 16% of the population.
There were 20,632 households out of which 28.1% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 38.9% were married couples living together, 17.5% had a female householder with no husband present, and 38.5% were non-families.
33% of all households were made up of individuals and 13.1% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older.
The average household size was 2.38 and the average family size was 3.01.
In the city, the population was spread out with 26.6% under the age of 20, 6.5% from 20 to 24, 26.1% from 25 to 44, 25.2% from 45 to 64, and 15.7% who were 65 years of age or older.
The median age was 38.3 years.
The median income for a household in the city was $42,097, and the median income for a family was $49,797.
The per capita income for the city was $23,465.
About 15.9% of families and 19.6% of the population were below the poverty line, including 34.9% of those under age 18 and 10.2% of those age 65 or over.
The local school system is known as the Alamance-Burlington School System, which was created by a merger between the Alamance County School System and the Burlington City School System in 1996.
Local public schools in Burlington include:
Alamance-Burlington School System
Alamance-Burlington Middle College
Alexander Wilson Elementary School
Altamahaw-Ossipee Elementary School
R. Homer Andrews Elementary School
Broadview Middle School
Career and Technical Education Center
Hugh M Cummings High School
Eastern Alamance High School
Eastlawn Elementary School
Elon Elementary School
Audrey W. Garrett Elementary School
Graham High School
Graham Middle School
Grove Park Elementary School
Hawfields Middle School
Haw River Elementary School
Highland Elementary School
Hillcrest Elementary School
E. M. Holt Elementary School
B. Everett Jordan Elementary School
Harvey R. Newlin Elementary School
North Graham Elementary School
Pleasant Grove Elementary School
Sellars-Gunn Education Center
Marvin B. Smith Elementary School
Southern Alamance High School
Southern Middle School
South Graham Elementary School
South Mebane Elementary School
Sylvan Elementary School
Turrentine Middle School
Western Alamance High School
Western Alamace Middle School
Walter M. Williams High School
Woodlawn Middle School
E. M. Yoder Elementary School
Private schools include:
Alamance Christian School
Blessed Sacrament School
The Burlington School
Burlington Christian Academy
Charter Schools include:
River Mill Academy
Transportation
Amtrak's Carolinian and Piedmont trains connect Burlington with New York, Philadelphia, Baltimore, Washington, Richmond, Raleigh and Charlotte.
The Amtrak station is situated at 101 North Main Street.
Burlington is about 35 miles from the Piedmont Triad International Airport in Greensboro and about 48 miles from Raleigh-Durham International Airport in Morrisville.
Burlington is expected to open its first public transit service, Link Transit, in the summer of 2016.
In addition, transportation services are available to its residents through the Alamance County Transportation Authority.
Locals can also ride the BioBus from nearby Elon University.
The Burlington Royals, a rookie-level farm team of Major League Baseball's Kansas City Royals, have played in Burlington since 2007.
The team is based at Burlington Athletic Stadium.
Prior to 2007 team was known as the Burlington Indians, functioning as a farm team of the Cleveland Indians since 1985.
LabCorp has its headquarters and several testing facilities in Burlington.
LabCorp is Alamance County's largest employer, employing over 3,000 people in the county.
Honda Aero, a subsidiary of Honda, recently announced that it will move its corporate headquarters to Burlington and build a $27 million plant at the Burlington-Alamance Regional Airport where it will build its HF120 jet engines for use in very light jets.
Biscuitville, a regional fast food chain, is based in Burlington.
Burlington is also the operations headquarters for Gold Toe Brands, a manufacturer of socks.
The Times-News is Burlington's only daily newspaper, and the area's dominant media outlet.
Zack's Hotdogs, a local restaurant opened by Zack Touloupas in 1928 is located in the revitalized downtown area.
National Agents Alliance has its headquarters in Burlington.
The city's only indoor mall, Holly Hill Mall is located at the intersection of Huffman Mill Road and Church Street (US 70).
An outdoor mall, Alamance Crossing, opened in 2007 at Interstate 40/85 and University Drive.
Just off I-85/40 at Exit 145 is North Carolina's original outlet mall, Burlington Outlet Village(formerly BMOC).
Burlington is known to have the most restaurants per capita in the state of North Carolina.
In 2011 Burlington was ranked 29th overall in cities with the best Restaurant Growth Index (RGI) with an RGI score of 167.
Burlington has 322 restaurants located throughout the city; popular ones include Zack's Hotdogs, Biscuitville, Mike's Deli, The Cutting Board, Prego's, Taaza Indian Bistro, Hursey's Bar-B-Q, The Village Grill, da Vinci's Table, Grill 5.8.4, La Fiesta, Boston Sandwich Shop, Danny's Cafe, Pano's Cafe, Stavros Grill, Vesuvio's Pizzeria, The Tuscany Grille, Maria's Cafe, Sal's, Victoria's Pizza, Blue Ribbon Diner, Skid's, Piedmont Ale House, The Park, Apollo's, little Italy, Harrison's and Mykonos Grill.
Samuel Bason, former state senator; banker and businessman in Yanceyville; attended high school in Burlington
Andrew Everett, professional wrestler
Brandon Tate (b.
1987), the professional wide receiver for the Cincinnati Bengals NFL football team, born in Burlington
Sister cities
Burlington has two sister cities:
Gwacheon, South Korea
Soledad de Graciano Sánchez, Mexico
See also
I-85 Corridor
Piedmont Triad
Times-News (Burlington, North Carolina)
References
External links
Official website
TheTimesNews.com - Burlington, NC Primary Newspaper website
Burlington/Alamance County Convention & Visitors Bureau
Alamance-Burlington School System
[1]
